Initial ERK discrete adjoint support in ARKODE (#649)
LLNL/sundials: doc/arkode/guide/source/Usage/ASA.rst

.. _ARKODE.Usage.ASA:

Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis
============================

The previous sections discuss using ARKODE for the integration of forward ODE models. This section
discusses how to use ARKODE for adjoint sensitivity analysis as introduced in
:numref:`ARKODE.Mathematics.ASA`. To use ARKStep for adjoint sensitivity analysis (ASA), users
simply setup the forward integration as usual (following :numref:`ARKODE.Usage.Skeleton`) with a few
differences. Below we provide an updated version of the ARKODE usage in section
:numref:`ARKODE.Usage.Skeleton` where steps that are unchanged are *italicized*. The example
code ``examples/arkode/C_serial/ark_lotka_volterra_asa.c`` demonstrates these steps in detail.

.. index:: Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis user main program

#. *Initialize parallel or multi-threaded environment, if appropriate.*

#. *Create the SUNDIALS simulation context object*

#. *Set problem dimensions, etc.*

#. *Set vector of initial values*

#. *Create a stepper object*

#. *Set optional inputs*

> #. *Specify rootfinding problem*

Author: @Steven-Roberts had commented that rootfinding seemed incompatible. However, I am not convinced yet that this is the case.

> #. *Specify rootfinding problem*

Author: Rootfinding should be compatible.

#. Create a :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` object

   Create the :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` object by calling ``SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme_Create_*``.
   Available :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` implementations are found in
   section :numref:`SUNAdjoint.CheckpointScheme`.
   
#. Attach the checkpoint scheme object to ARKODE 
   
   Call :c:func:`ARKodeSetAdjointCheckpointScheme()`.

#. *Advance solution in time*

#. *Get optional outputs*

#. Create the sensitivities vector with the terminal condition

>    The sensitivities vector must be an instance of the :ref:`ManyVector N_Vector implementation <NVectors.ManyVector>`.

Author: I believe the best way to do things is: 

1) Require that a ManyVector (disallow MPIManyVector) is used to separate the $\lambda$ and $\mu$ variables
2) the $\lambda$ and $\mu$ subvectors can be anything, such as MPIManyVectors

This allows the $\lambda$ and $\mu$ vectors to be distributed differently, which could make sense given that they may have vastly different lengths. If for some reason you needed to take norms over both $\lambda$ and $\mu$, I don't see a reason why this would be a problem.

>    The sensitivities vector must be an instance of the :ref:`ManyVector N_Vector implementation <NVectors.ManyVector>`.

Reviewer: Actually, it does have to be a ManyVector because we call ManyVector functions specifically (see [this comment](https://github.com/LLNL/sundials/pull/649#discussion_r2020714260))

   :param sf: the sensitivity vector holding the adjoint system terminal condition.
      This must be an instance of the ManyVector ``N_Vector`` implementation with at
      least one subvector (depending on if sensitivities to parameters should be computed).
      The first subvector must be :math:`\partial g_y(y(t_f)) \in \mathbb{R}^N`. If sensitivities to parameters should be computed, then the second subvector must be :math:`g_p(y(t_f), p) \in \mathbb{R}^{N_s}`,
      otherwise only one subvector should be provided.
   :param adj_stepper_ptr: the newly created :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object.

   :return:
      * ``ARK_SUCCESS`` if successful
      * ``ARK_MEM_FAIL`` if a memory allocation failed
      * ``ARK_ILL_INPUT`` if an argument has an illegal value.

   .. versionadded:: x.y.z

.. c:function:: int ARKStepCreateAdjointStepper(void* arkode_mem, N_Vector sf, SUNAdjointStepper* adj_stepper_ptr)

   Creates a :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object compatible with the provided ARKStep instance for
   integrating the adjoint sensitivity system :eq:`ARKODE_DISCRETE_ADJOINT`.

   :param arkode_mem: a pointer to the ARKStep memory block.

>    :param sf: the sensitivity vector holding the adjoint system terminal condition.

Author: I suppose for fixed steps it would be the same time, but for extensibility to adaptive steps we should make it an argument.

>    :param sf: the sensitivity vector holding the adjoint system terminal condition.

Author: FWIW, I was using `ark_mem->tretlast` which should be the same as the `tf`. However, it probably makes more sense to accept it as an argument in case someone wants to setup the adjoint problem from an intermediate output time.

.. _ARKODE.Usage.ASA:

Adjoint Sensitivity Analysis
============================

The previous sections discuss using ARKODE for the integration of forward ODE models. This section
discusses how to use ARKODE for adjoint sensitivity analysis as introduced in
:numref:`ARKODE.Mathematics.ASA`. To use ARKStep for adjoint sensitivity analysis (ASA), users
simply setup the forward integration as usual (following :numref:`ARKODE.Usage.Skeleton`) with a few

> differences. Below we provide an updated version of the ARKode usage in section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
differences. Below we provide an updated version of the ARKODE usage in section
```

> :numref:`ARKODE.Usage.Skeleton` where steps that are unchanged from are *italicized*. The example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:numref:`ARKODE.Usage.Skeleton` where steps that are unchanged are *italicized*. The example
```

#. *Specify rootfinding problem*

#. Create a :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` object

   Create the :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` object by calling ``SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme_Create_*``.
   Available :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` implementations are found in
   section :numref:`SUNAdjoint.CheckpointScheme`.
   
#. Attach the checkpoint scheme object to ARKODE 
   
   Call :c:func:`ARKodeSetAdjointCheckpointScheme()`.

#. *Advance solution in time*

#. *Get optional outputs*

#. Create the sensitivities vector with the terminal condition

   The sensitivities vector must be an instance of the :ref:`ManyVector N_Vector implementation <NVectors.ManyVector>`.
   You will have one subvector for the initial condition sensitivities and an additional subvector if you
   want sensitivities with respect to parameters.
   The vector should contain the terminal condition from the forward problem.

#. Create the :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object

   Call :c:func:`ERKStepCreateAdjointStepper` or :c:func:`ARKStepCreateAdjointStepper`.

#. Set either the Jacobian-vector product, vector-Jacobian product, or Jacobian evaluation functions

   Users must supply one of:
   

>    * :math:`(\partial f/\partial y)^*v`,
>    * :math:`v^*(\partial f/\partial y)`,

Reviewer 2: Does the asterisk here represent matrix-vector or vector-matrix multiplication?  Or does this represent the complex conjugate transpose?  Given that `Mathematics.rst` used the non-complex transpose "^T", and SUNDIALS does not yet support complex arithmetic, then should this instead be the following?
```suggestion
   * :math:`(\partial f/\partial y)^Tv`,
   * :math:`v^T(\partial f/\partial y)`,
```

Author: It represents the complex conjugate transpose. I think we can change it back to `^T` for now as you suggested.

Reviewer: We discussed using `^*` or `^T` at an earlier meeting and decided to go with `^*` to be consistent with the CVODES documentation and so this does not need to be updated when complex support is added

   * :math:`(\partial f/\partial y)`,

   and, if sensitivities with respect to the parameters is desired, one of

>    * :math:`(\partial f/\partial p)^*v`,
>    * :math:`v^*(\partial f/\partial p)`,

Reviewer 2: Same question/recommendation here:
```suggestion
   * :math:`(\partial f/\partial p)^Tv`,
   * :math:`v^T(\partial f/\partial p)`,
```

Reviewer: See discussion in [this comment](https://github.com/LLNL/sundials/pull/649#discussion_r2017876191)

   * :math:`(\partial f/\partial p)`.

   These user-supplied routines can be set with :c:func:`SUNAdjointStepper_SetJacHermitianTransposeVecFn`, or
   :c:func:`SUNAdjointStepper_SetJacFn`.

#. Set optional ASA input

   Refer to :numref:`SUNAdjoint.Stepper` for options.

#. Advance the adjoint sensitivity analysis ODE

   Call :c:func:`SUNAdjointStepper_Evolve`.

#. Get optional ASA outputs

   Refer to :numref:`SUNAdjoint.Stepper` for options.

#. Deallocate memory for ASA objects

   Deallocate the sensitivities vector, :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper`, 
   and :c:type:`SUNAdjointCheckpointScheme` objects.

#. *Deallocate memory for solution vector*

#. Free solver memory

>    * If an ARKODE stepper module was used as a partition IVP integrator, call
>      :c:func:`SUNStepper_Destroy` and :c:func:`ARKodeFree` to free the memory
>      allocated for that integrator.
> 
>    * If a user-defined partition integrator was supplied, free the integrator
>      content and call :c:func:`SUNStepper_Destroy` to free the :c:type:`SUNStepper`
>      object.
> 
>    * Call :c:func:`ARKodeFree` to free the memory allocated for the
>      SplittingStep integration object.

Reviewer 2: The instruction at the top of this skeleton only explained how to create the SUNStepper using ARKODE (via :c:func:`ERKStepCreateAdjointStepper` or :c:func:`ARKStepCreateAdjointStepper`), so this second bullet lacks context.  Furthermore, I don't see why the third bullet is here at all.  Lastly, nothing about this skeleton discusses partition integrators -- I think these may be the result of a bad merge?
```suggestion
   * Call :c:func:`SUNStepper_Destroy` and :c:func:`ARKodeFree` to free the memory
     allocated for the SUNStepper and ARKODE integrator objects.
```

Author: Yes, this is just from a bad merge / copy-paste.

#. *Free the SUNContext object*

#. *Finalize MPI, if used*

User Callable Functions
-----------------------

> This section describes ERKStep-specific user-callable functions for performing
> adjoint sensitivity analysis with methods with ERKStep.

Reviewer 2: The functions below are not ERKStep-specific.
```suggestion
This section describes user-callable functions for performing
adjoint sensitivity analysis with methods with ERKStep and ARKStep.
```

.. c:function:: int ERKStepCreateAdjointStepper(void* arkode_mem, N_Vector sf, SUNAdjointStepper* adj_stepper_ptr)

>    Creates a :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object compatible with the provided ARKStep instance for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Creates a :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object compatible with the provided ERKStep instance for
```

   integrating the adjoint sensitivity system :eq:`ARKODE_DISCRETE_ADJOINT`.

>    :param arkode_mem: a pointer to the ARKStep memory block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :param arkode_mem: a pointer to the ERKStep memory block.
```

.. c:function:: int ARKStepCreateAdjointStepper(void* arkode_mem, N_Vector sf, SUNAdjointStepper* adj_stepper_ptr)

   Creates a :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object compatible with the provided ARKStep instance for
   integrating the adjoint sensitivity system :eq:`ARKODE_DISCRETE_ADJOINT`.

   :param arkode_mem: a pointer to the ARKStep memory block.
   :param sf: the sensitivity vector holding the adjoint system terminal condition.
      This must be an instance of the ManyVector ``N_Vector`` implementation with at
      least one subvector (depending on if sensitivities to parameters should be computed).
      The first subvector must be :math:`\partial g_y(y(t_f)) \in \mathbb{R}^N`. If sensitivities to parameters should be computed, then the second subvector must be :math:`g_p(y(t_f), p) \in \mathbb{R}^{N_s}`,
      otherwise only one subvector should be provided.
   :param adj_stepper_ptr: the newly created :c:type:`SUNAdjointStepper` object.

   :return:
      * ``ARK_SUCCESS`` if successful
      * ``ARK_MEM_FAIL`` if a memory allocation failed
      * ``ARK_ILL_INPUT`` if an argument has an illegal value.

   .. versionadded:: x.y.z

   .. note:: 

>       Currently only explicit methods are supported for ASA.

Reviewer 2: I assume that non-identity mass matrices are also prohibited (even though ARKStep supports them for explicit methods)?  If that is the case, then I recommend a minor edit:
```suggestion
      Currently only explicit methods with identity mass matrices are supported for ASA.
```
